Super-Resolution Autoencoder (x2)

This project implements a Super-Resolution model using a Convolutional Autoencoder trained on the Flickr2K dataset.

The goal of the model is to reconstruct a high-resolution image (128×128) from a low-resolution input (64×64).
The pipeline includes dataset preparation, model training, evaluation, and comparison with a classical bicubic interpolation baseline.

Project Overview

Super-resolution (SR) is the task of increasing the spatial resolution of an image.
In this project, the model learns the mapping:
Low Resolution (64×64) → Neural Network → Super-Resolved Image (128×128)

The low-resolution images are generated by downsampling the original images using bicubic interpolation.

Dataset

The model is trained on the Flickr2K dataset, which contains high-quality natural images commonly used in super-resolution research.

From each image:
A random HR patch (128×128) is extracted.
A corresponding LR patch (64×64) is generated using bicubic downsampling.
This creates supervised training pairs:
LR (64×64) → HR (128×128)

Repository Structure

Masinsko-ucenje-I40

dataset.py
    Functions for loading images and creating LR–HR training pairs.

notebooks/

    dataset.ipynb
        Exploration and testing of dataset functions and preprocessing pipeline.

    model.ipynb
        Implementation of the encoder, decoder, and autoencoder model.
        Includes training, visualization of training curves, and saving the trained model.

    evaluation.ipynb
        Model evaluation on the test dataset.
        Computes PSNR metrics and compares the model with a bicubic baseline.

models/
    Saved trained model (.keras format)

Model Architecture

The model is a Convolutional Autoencoder composed of:

Encoder
The encoder extracts hierarchical features from the low-resolution image using convolutional layers with stride-based downsampling.

Decoder
The decoder reconstructs the high-resolution image using transposed convolutions and convolutional refinement layers.

Input (64×64×3)
    ↓
Convolutional Encoder
    ↓
Latent Representation
    ↓
Decoder (Upsampling)
    ↓
Output (128×128×3)


Training

The model is trained using:
Loss function: Mean Absolute Error (MAE / L1)
Metric: Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR)
Optimizer: Adam
Training uses the TensorFlow tf.data pipeline for efficient batching and prefetching.

Evaluation

The model is evaluated on a held-out test dataset using PSNR.
Two approaches are compared:
Bicubic interpolation
Neural network super-resolution
Example evaluation pipeline:
LR image
   ↓
Bicubic Upscale
   ↓
PSNR vs HR
LR image
   ↓
Neural Network
   ↓
Super-Resolved Image
   ↓
PSNR vs HR


Visual comparisons are also provided:
LR | Bicubic | Model Prediction | HR


Results

The evaluation notebook computes the average PSNR on the test set and compares the neural network output to the bicubic baseline.
Due to the dataset being generated using bicubic downsampling, the bicubic baseline is very strong.


Requirements
Main dependencies:
Python 3.10+
TensorFlow
NumPy
Matplotlib
Pillow

Install dependencies:
pip install tensorflow numpy matplotlib pillow


How to Run:

Explore dataset creation
notebooks/dataset.ipynb

Train the model
notebooks/model.ipynb

Evaluate the trained model
notebooks/evaluation.ipynb